doc/src/base.md, before:

(nixos-base)=

# Base environment

The base installation includes various tools that generally help with
application deployment. They are available on every Flying Circus NixOS VM.
The package's installation includes availability to run them manually and
to compile your own software against them.

However, those are intended for short-term convenience. Linking against them
may cause breakage of your applications in the long term.

Also, those packages are not providing running daemons (like apacheHttpd). If you
need a managed component, those need to be activated explicitly.

You can look up packages and their descriptions via the [NixOS Package Search](https://search.nixos.org/packages).

## Packages

- apacheHttpd
- atop
- automake
- bc
- cmake
- curl
- db
- dnsutils
- dstat
- ethtool
- file
- fc.logcheckhelper
- fio
- gcc
- gdb
- git
- gnumake
- gnupg
- gptfdisk
- htop
- inetutils (telnet)
- iotop
- jq
- latencytop
- links2
- lsof
- lynx
- mailx
- mercurial
- mmv
- mtr
- nano
- ncdu
- netcat
- ngrep
- nix-top
- nixfmt
- nmap
- nvd
- openssl
- pkg-config
- psmisc
- pwgen
- python3
- pythonPackages.virtualenv
- ripgrep
- screen
- statix
- strace
- sysstat
- tcpdump
- tree
- unzip
- vim
- w3m-nographics
- wdiff
- wget
- xfsprogs

## Configuration

All tools can be configured individually with dotfiles in the user's home
directory.

## Interaction

Service users may invoke {command}`sudo systemctl` to restart individual
services manually. See also {ref}`nixos-local` for information about how to
activate configuration changes.

% vim: set spell spelllang=en:

Commit message:

docs: base environment and systemd improvements
The chapter about custom systemd units now has general information
about how units/services are handled by the platform.

There was a section about interacting with services in the base
environment chapter which fits better into the systemd chapter.

doc/src/base.md, after:

(nixos-base)=

# Base environment

The base installation includes various packages that generally help with
application deployment and provide various system tools. Most of them add
executable files to the global PATH and some can be used as a library.

Depending on globally-installed packages should generally be avoided as this
may cause breakage of your applications, especially on NixOS upgrades. It's
better to use custom user environments to install application dependencies,
as described in {ref}`nixos-user-package-management` or other methods to
isolate application dependencies from the system.

Also note that these packages don't provide running services/daemons, like
`apacheHttpd`. Services are typically activated by adding _roles_
(also called _components_) to a machine, for example `lamp`.

You can look up packages and their descriptions via the [NixOS Package Search](https://search.nixos.org/packages).

## Packages added by our platform

- apacheHttpd
- atop
- automake
- bc
- cmake
- curl
- db
- dnsutils
- dstat
- ethtool
- file
- fc.logcheckhelper
- fio
- gcc
- gdb
- git
- gnumake
- gnupg
- gptfdisk
- htop
- inetutils (telnet)
- iotop
- jq
- latencytop
- links2
- lsof
- lynx
- mailx
- mercurial
- mmv
- mtr
- nano
- ncdu
- netcat
- ngrep
- nix-top
- nixfmt
- nmap
- nvd
- openssl
- pkg-config
- psmisc
- pwgen
- python3
- pythonPackages.virtualenv
- ripgrep
- screen
- statix
- strace
- sysstat
- tcpdump
- tree
- unzip
- vim
- w3m-nographics
- wdiff
- wget
- xfsprogs

## Configuration

We provide global basic config for some tools, like bash. Further
configuration can be done with _dotfiles_ in a user's home directory.


% vim: set spell spelllang=en:
