(nixos-lamp)=

# LAMP (Apache/mod_php)

The LAMP role starts a managed instance of Apache with `php-fpm` that can be
used to easily run a production-ready PHP application server.

:::{note}
The Apache configured by this role does not bind / open firewall ports to the
frontend network automatically. It is not intended to serve applications
directly to consumers but should be placed behind a {ref}`webgateway
<nixos-webgateway>`.
:::

## Configuration

This role is configured exclusively using NixOS configuration options. It can
provide multiple applications by setting up multiple vhosts and you can put the
configuration in a single file or distribute it over multiple files depending on
your use case.

As a service user, place a file in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/{myservice}.nix`:

A complete configuration might looks something like this:

```Nix
{ pkgs, ... }:

{

  flyingcircus.roles.lamp = {

    vhosts = [
      { port = 8000;
        docroot = "/srv/s-myserviceuser/application.git/docroot";
      }
      { port = 8001;
        docroot = "/srv/s-myserviceuser/application.git/other_php_version_root";
        pool = {
            phpPackage = pkgs.lamp_php80;
            settings = {
                "pm.max_requests" = 50;
            };
        };
        apacheExtraConfig = ''
          FancyIndexing on
        '';
      }
    ];

    php = pkgs.lamp_php74;

    apache_conf = ''
      MaxRequestWorkers 5
    '';

    fpmMaxChildren = 100;

    php_ini = ''
      ; max filesize
      upload_max_filesize = 200M
      post_max_size = 200M


      date.timezone = Europe/Berlin

      session.save_handler = redis
      session.save_path = "tcp://myservice01:6379?auth=<secret>"
    '';

  };
}
```

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.vhost` (required)

The vhost configuration allows you to configure multiple applications per VM
each running on a separate port. The two options for every vhost thus are:

`port`

: The port number that Apache should listen on for this application.
  We recommend starting with 8000 and counting up from there.

`docroot`

: The absolute path to the docroot of your application.

`apacheExtraConfig`

: Additional text appended to virtualhost section of apache config.

In general, the apache configuration is generated by the role like this:

```
Listen *:${port}
<VirtualHost *:${port}>
    [...]
    ${vhost.apacheExtraConfig}
</VirtualHost>
```

`pool`

: Described below

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.vhost.*.pool` (optional)

Allows you to configure the phpfpm pool for this vhost individually.

Options are:

`user`

: User account under which this pool runs.

`settings`

: PHP-FPM pool directives. Refer to the "List of pool directives" section of
  [the PHP Manual](https://www.php.net/manual/en/install.fpm.configuration.php)
  for details. Note that settings names must be enclosed in quotes (e.g.
  `"pm.max_children"` instead of `pm.max_children`). This overrides
  the default options     set by our role.

  Example:

  ```Nix
  {
          "pm" = "dynamic";
          "pm.max_children" = 75;
          "pm.start_servers" = 10;
          "pm.min_spare_servers" = 5;
          "pm.max_spare_servers" = 20;
          "pm.max_requests" = 500;
  }
  ```

`phpPackage`

: The PHP package to use for running this PHP-FPM pool. This overrides the option
  set by the role.

  See previous option for example.

`phpOptions`

: Options appended to the PHP configuration file `php.ini` used for this PHP-FPM pool.

`phpEnv`

: Environment variables used for this PHP-FPM pool.

  Example:

  ```Nix
  {
          HOSTNAME = "$HOSTNAME";
          TMP = "/tmp";
          TMPDIR = "/tmp";
          TEMP = "/tmp";
  }
  ```

`group`

: Group account under which this pool runs.

`extraConfig`

: Extra lines that go into the pool configuration.
  See the documentation on php-fpm.conf for details
  on configuration directives.

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.apache_conf` (optional)

Any text written here will be included in the global Apache configuration. Use
this to adjust global settings like workers:

```ApacheConf
MaxRequestWorkers 5
```

Note, that if you distribute your configuration over multiple files then you
can repeat this option and the values will be concatenated to a single big
Apache config file. They will also always apply to all vhosts.

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.fpmMaxChildren` (optional)

Set the maximum number of worker processes any vhost is allowed to spawn.

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.php` (optional)

A reference to a PHP package that will be used in Apache and in the
CLI.

Supported packages:

- `pkgs.lamp_php72` (outdated but provided for legacy applications)
- `pkgs.lamp_php73`
- `pkgs.lamp_php74`
- `pkgs.lamp_php80`
- `pkgs.lamp_php81`

The `lamp_php_*` packages provided by our platform include commonly used
PHP extensions, currently:

- bcmath
- imagick
- redis
- memcached

There are more pre-packaged extension that can be added via Nix code. For example,
to add the apcu extension along with the ones provided by lamp_php80, use:

```Nix
php = pkgs.lamp_php80.withExtensions ({ enabled, all }:
  enabled ++ [
    all.apcu
  ]);
```

You can also use any custom PHP package from the NixOS universe (if you
know what you are doing. ;) )

For more information about PHP packaging on Nix, refer to the
[PHP section of the Nixpkgs manual](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-php).

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.tideways_api_key` (optional)

If you have an account with tideways.com then you can quickly enable the
tideways profiler for your application by setting the API key here:

```Nix
flyingcircus.roles.lamp.tideways_api_key = "my-api-key";
```

### `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.php_ini` (optional)

We deliver a production-tested PHP configuration that you can extend by placing
additional configuration instructions in this option:

```INI
; max filesize
upload_max_filesize = 200M
post_max_size = 200M
```

Similar to the `flyingcircus.roles.lamp.apache_conf` option this will
be concatenated with from all Nix configuration files with our global platform
settings and will be applied to all vhosts.

### PHP version and modules

We currently provide a single pre-selected version of PHP (7.3) with a fixed set
of modules. Please contact our support if you need a different version of PHP
and/or further modules.

## Interaction

No special interaction is required. Changes to the configuration need to be
activated as usual using:

```console
$ sudo fc-manage -b
```

## Network

The Apache server listens on the {external+doc:ref}`srv interface <logical-networks>` only.

## Security

- Apache runs in a separate user who is a member of the `service` group and
  thus can (by default) access files owned by service users.
- Access is read-only for Apache by default, but you can grant write access for
  directories by running :command:`chmod g+rwsx` on the directory.

## Debugging

To assist with debugging we have integrated the [Tideways application performance monitoring](https://tideways.com/) daemon and PHP module by default.

To enable it, you just have to place your Tideways API key in {file}`/etc/local/lamp/php.ini`:

```console
$ echo "tideways.api_key=<secretapikey>" >> /etc/local/lamp/php.ini
$ sudo fc-manage -b
```

## Logging

Apache logs are available in {file}`/var/log/httpd`.

PHP output is accessible through the journal, running {command}`journalctl -t php -t httpd`.

## Monitoring

Our platform monitoring checks that Apache is running (through systemd) and verifies that the Apache statuspage (mod_status accessible via {command}`curl http://localhost:8001/server-status`) is available.
