doc/src/systemd.md, before:

(nixos-systemd)=

# systemd

Services on NixOS systems are managed by _systemd_. In addition to the unit
files provided by systemd itself, NixOS and our platform code generate unit
files based on the configuration of a system. When activating a new system
configuration, NixOS automatically restarts or reloads changed units.

## Interaction

Service users may invoke {command}`sudo systemctl` to restart individual
units, typically services.

Note that stopped services referenced by `multi-user.target` will be started
by our management task which runs every 10 minutes or when activating system
configuration changes manually.

See also {ref}`nixos-local` for information about how to activate system
configuration changes.

See the chapter [Service Management]
(https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-systemctl) in the NixOS manual
for more information.


## Custom Units

You can define your own unit files using NixOS configuration modules
in {file}`/etc/local/nixos` or plain unit files in {file}`/etc/local/systemd`.
Using NixOS configuration is the most flexible and recommended approach.
Plain unit files are deprecated and may not work as expected.

A few notes that you should pay attention to:

- We do not enforce the user. You can start your services as root, but that
  may easily cause permission issues and poses severe security risks. Please
  confine your services to an appropriate user, typically your service user
  or let systemd handle it by using [DynamicUser](http://0pointer.net/blog/dynamic-users-with-systemd.html).
- Your service should not daemonize / detach on its own. systemd works best
  when you just start and stay attached in the foreground.
- NixOS automatically restarts units when meaningful changes to the unit are
  detected. Note that changes to comments or whitespace don't trigger a
  restart. This behaviour changed compared to versions before 22.05 where every
  content change triggered a restart. If you have some value that should restart
  the unit when it changes, add it to the `X-Restart-Triggers` directive in the
  `[Unit]` section when using plain config or `restartTriggers` when using
  NixOS config. Since 22.05, it's also possible to use `reloadTriggers`. See the
  examples below in the corresponding configuration sections.

See the
[systemd.service and related pages](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.service.html)
for further information about systemD units, and the
[NixOS Manual/Unit handling](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-unit-handling)
section for details about the start/stop/restart/reload behaviour when units
change.


### NixOS Unit Configuration

By writing a custom NixOS module, you can define all kinds of systemd units.
See the [NixOS options for service units](https://search.nixos.org/options?from=0&size=30&sort=relevance&query=systemd.services.%3Cname%3E)
for all available settings.

#### Minimal Service Example

Place the following NixOS module in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/systemd-service-minimal-example.nix` (file name doesn't matter, just needs the .nix extension):

```nix
{
  systemd.services.minimal-example = {
    description = "A minimal example for a custom systemd service";
    wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ];
    serviceConfig = {
      ExecStart = "/srv/s-myservice/bin/runme";
      User = "s-myservice";
      Group = "service";
    };
  };
}
```

This starts the service after boot and when {command}`fc-manage` is run.
It runs as user *s-myservice* and doesn't restart if the executable fails.

#### Application Service Example

Place the following NixOS module in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/systemd-service-myapp.nix`:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  systemd.services.myapp = {
    after = [ "network.target" "postgresql.service" ];
    wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ];
    # When the unit changes, just do a restart with the new unit settings instead
    # of a stop/start cycle which takes longer.
    # This is safe if there's no ExecStop command.
    stopIfChanged = false;
    # Run a script before starting the actual application.
    preStart = ''
      echo "Setting up the config file...":
      echo HOST=${config.networking.hostName} > $RUNTIME_DIRECTORY/config
    '';
    path = with pkgs; [
      bash # adds all binaries from the bash package to PATH
      "/run/wrappers" # if you need something from /run/wrappers/bin, sudo, for example
    ];
    # Trigger a unit reload when the listed value changes.
    reloadTriggers = [
      config.a.computed.value
    ];
    # Trigger a unit restart when one of the listed values changes.
    restartTriggers = [
      config.some.computed.value
      config.other.computed.value
    ];
    serviceConfig = {
      Description = "Run application myapp";
      # Use /run/myapp as temporary app runtime directory.
      # Can be referenced by the environment variable $RUNTIME_DIRECTORY
      RuntimeDirectory = "myapp";
      # Use /var/lib/myapp as persistent app state directory.
      # Can be referenced by the environment variable $STATE_DIRECTORY
      StateDirectory = "myapp";
      DynamicUser = true;
      # Service type simple is used by default, so the start command should not daemonize!
      ExecStart = "/srv/myapp/bin/run";
      # Set environment variables for the application.
      Environment = [
        "LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${pkgs.file}/lib"
        "VERBOSE=1"
      ];
      # Automatically restart service when it exits.
      Restart = "always";
      # Wait a second before restarting.
      RestartSec = "1s";

      # Security hardening
      CapabilityBoundingSet = "";
      DevicePolicy = "closed";
      LockPersonality = true;
      MemoryDenyWriteExecute = true;
      NoNewPrivileges = true;
      PrivateDevices = true;
      PrivateUsers = true;
      ProtectClock = true;
      ProtectControlGroups = true;
      ProtectHome = true;
      ProtectHostname = true;
      ProtectKernelLogs = true;
      ProtectKernelModules = true;
      ProtectKernelTunables = true;
      ProtectProc = "invisible";
      ProtectSystem = "strict";
      PrivateTmp = true;
      RestrictAddressFamilies = [ "AF_INET" "AF_INET6" ];
      RestrictNamespaces = true;
      RestrictRealtime = true;
      RestrictSUIDSGID = true;
      SystemCallArchitectures = "native";
      # Allow typical system calls for a service.
      SystemCallFilter = [
        "@system-service"
      ];
    };
    unitConfig = {
      Documentation = [
        "https://example.org/myapp"
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

systemd supports many options to harden services to limit the attack surface.
The example includes quite restrictive settings that may not work for your service.
Internet connectivity is still possible but many potentially dangerous ways to
interact with the system are prohibited.

You can check the security settings with `systemd-analyze security myapp` which yields
a score of 1.3 for the given config (1 is the best, 10 the worst).

#### Timer Example

Place the following NixOS module in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/systemd-mytask.nix`:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  systemd.timers.mytask = {
    wantedBy = [ "timers.target" ];
    timerConfig = {
      OnCalendar = "daily";
      Persistent = true;
    };
  };

  systemd.services.mytask = {
    path = with pkgs; [
      bash # adds all executables from the bash package to PATH
      "/run/wrappers" # if you need something from /run/wrappers/bin, sudo, for example
    ];
    serviceConfig = {
      Description = "Run daily maintenance script.";
      Type = "oneshot";
      User = "test";
      ExecStart = "/srv/test/mytask.sh";
      # Set environment variables for the script.
      Environment = [
        "LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${pkgs.file}/lib"
        "VERBOSE=1"
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

### Plain Unit Configuration

We still support plain unit config in in {file}`/etc/local/systemd/<unit-name>.service`
but it's deprecated. Use Nix config instead, as shown above.

We bind your service unit to the {literal}`multi-user.target` by default so they
will be automatically started upon boot and stopped properly when the
machine shuts down.

:::{warning}
Don't use this for services that are meant to be started by a timer!
Oneshot services defined this way are triggered on by our management task
which means that they will run every 10 minutes!
:::

A simple unit file to start a service may look like this:

```{code-block} ini
:caption: myservice.service

[Unit]
Description=My Application Service

[Service]
Environment="PATH=/run/wrappers/bin:/nix/var/nix/profiles/default/bin:/nix/var/nix/profiles/default/sbin:/run/current-system/sw/bin:/run/current-system/sw/sbin"

User=s-myservice
Group=service

ExecStart=/srv/s-myservice/bin/runme
```

If you want to trigger a restart when a certain value changes which would
normally not be a part of the unit config, for example an externally
computed hash value, add the value using the `X-Restart-Triggers` directive.
The name of the directive is only a convention, you can use any directive to
trigger a restart. Using a templated unit, for example in a [batou](https://batou.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
deployment could look like this:

```{code-block} ini
:caption: myrestartservice.service

[Unit]
Description=My Restarting Application Service
X-Restart-Triggers={{ component.hash }}

...
```

Commit message:

docs: document systemd unit checks

doc/src/systemd.md, after:

(nixos-systemd)=

# systemd

Services on NixOS systems are managed by _systemd_. In addition to the unit
files provided by systemd itself, NixOS and our platform code generate unit
files based on the configuration of a system. When activating a new system
configuration, NixOS automatically restarts or reloads changed units.

## Interaction

Service users may invoke {command}`sudo systemctl` to restart individual
units, typically services.

Note that stopped services referenced by `multi-user.target` will be started
by our management task which runs every 10 minutes or when activating system
configuration changes manually.

See also {ref}`nixos-local` for information about how to activate system
configuration changes.

See the chapter [Service Management](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-systemctl)
in the NixOS manual for more information.

## Monitoring

By default, we define a Sensu check called `systemd_units_non_critical` which
emits a warning when there is at least one systemd unit in state `failed`.
The check output also lists all affected units.

You can define separate checks for important systemd services. These checks
become `critical` when the service unit is not in state `active`, by using
the option `flyingcircus.services.sensu-client.systemUnitChecks`. See
{ref}`nixos-systemd-app-service-example` below.


## Custom Units

You can define your own unit files using NixOS configuration modules
in {file}`/etc/local/nixos` or plain unit files in {file}`/etc/local/systemd`.
Using NixOS configuration is the most flexible and recommended approach.
Plain unit files are deprecated and may not work as expected.

A few notes that you should pay attention to:

- We do not enforce the user. You can start your services as root, but that
  may easily cause permission issues and poses severe security risks. Please
  confine your services to an appropriate user, typically your service user
  or let systemd handle it by using [DynamicUser](http://0pointer.net/blog/dynamic-users-with-systemd.html).
- Your service should not daemonize / detach on its own. systemd works best
  when you just start and stay attached in the foreground.
- NixOS automatically restarts units when meaningful changes to the unit are
  detected. Note that changes to comments or whitespace don't trigger a
  restart. This behaviour changed compared to versions before 22.05 where every
  content change triggered a restart. If you have some value that should restart
  the unit when it changes, add it to the `X-Restart-Triggers` directive in the
  `[Unit]` section when using plain config or `restartTriggers` when using
  NixOS config. Since 22.05, it's also possible to use `reloadTriggers`. See the
  examples below in the corresponding configuration sections.

See the
[systemd.service and related pages](https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.service.html)
for further information about systemD units, and the
[NixOS Manual/Unit handling](https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/index.html#sec-unit-handling)
section for details about the start/stop/restart/reload behaviour when units
change.


### NixOS Unit Configuration

By writing a custom NixOS module, you can define all kinds of systemd units.
See the [NixOS options for service units](https://search.nixos.org/options?from=0&size=30&sort=relevance&query=systemd.services.%3Cname%3E)
for all available settings.

#### Minimal Service Example

Place the following NixOS module in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/systemd-service-minimal-example.nix` (file name doesn't matter, just needs the .nix extension):

```nix
{
  systemd.services.minimal-example = {
    description = "A minimal example for a custom systemd service";
    wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ];
    serviceConfig = {
      ExecStart = "/srv/s-myservice/bin/runme";
      User = "s-myservice";
      Group = "service";
    };
  };
}
```

This starts the service after boot and when {command}`fc-manage` is run.
It runs as user *s-myservice* and doesn't restart if the executable fails.

(nixos-systemd-app-service-example)=

#### Application Service Example

Place the following NixOS module in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/systemd-service-myapp.nix`:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  # Defines a Sensu check called `systemd_unit-myapp` which becomes critical when
  # the service stops running.
  flyingcircus.services.sensu-client.systemUnitChecks = { "myapp.service" = {}; };

  systemd.services.myapp = {
    after = [ "network.target" "postgresql.service" ];
    wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ];
    # When the unit changes, just do a restart with the new unit settings instead
    # of a stop/start cycle which takes longer.
    # This is safe if there's no ExecStop command.
    stopIfChanged = false;
    # Run a script before starting the actual application.
    preStart = ''
      echo "Setting up the config file...":
      echo HOST=${config.networking.hostName} > $RUNTIME_DIRECTORY/config
    '';
    path = with pkgs; [
      bash # adds all binaries from the bash package to PATH
      "/run/wrappers" # if you need something from /run/wrappers/bin, sudo, for example
    ];
    # Trigger a unit reload when the listed value changes.
    reloadTriggers = [
      config.a.computed.value
    ];
    # Trigger a unit restart when one of the listed values changes.
    restartTriggers = [
      config.some.computed.value
      config.other.computed.value
    ];
    serviceConfig = {
      Description = "Run application myapp";
      # Use /run/myapp as temporary app runtime directory.
      # Can be referenced by the environment variable $RUNTIME_DIRECTORY
      RuntimeDirectory = "myapp";
      # Use /var/lib/myapp as persistent app state directory.
      # Can be referenced by the environment variable $STATE_DIRECTORY
      StateDirectory = "myapp";
      DynamicUser = true;
      # Service type simple is used by default, so the start command should not daemonize!
      ExecStart = "/srv/myapp/bin/run";
      # Set environment variables for the application.
      Environment = [
        "LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${pkgs.file}/lib"
        "VERBOSE=1"
      ];
      # Automatically restart service when it exits.
      Restart = "always";
      # Wait a second before restarting.
      RestartSec = "1s";

      # Security hardening
      CapabilityBoundingSet = "";
      DevicePolicy = "closed";
      LockPersonality = true;
      MemoryDenyWriteExecute = true;
      NoNewPrivileges = true;
      PrivateDevices = true;
      PrivateUsers = true;
      ProtectClock = true;
      ProtectControlGroups = true;
      ProtectHome = true;
      ProtectHostname = true;
      ProtectKernelLogs = true;
      ProtectKernelModules = true;
      ProtectKernelTunables = true;
      ProtectProc = "invisible";
      ProtectSystem = "strict";
      PrivateTmp = true;
      RestrictAddressFamilies = [ "AF_INET" "AF_INET6" ];
      RestrictNamespaces = true;
      RestrictRealtime = true;
      RestrictSUIDSGID = true;
      SystemCallArchitectures = "native";
      # Allow typical system calls for a service.
      SystemCallFilter = [
        "@system-service"
      ];
    };
    unitConfig = {
      Documentation = [
        "https://example.org/myapp"
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

systemd supports many options to harden services to limit the attack surface.
The example includes quite restrictive settings that may not work for your service.
Internet connectivity is still possible but many potentially dangerous ways to
interact with the system are prohibited.

You can check the security settings with `systemd-analyze security myapp` which yields
a score of 1.3 for the given config (1 is the best, 10 the worst).

#### Timer Example

Place the following NixOS module in {file}`/etc/local/nixos/systemd-mytask.nix`:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:
{
  systemd.timers.mytask = {
    wantedBy = [ "timers.target" ];
    timerConfig = {
      OnCalendar = "daily";
      Persistent = true;
    };
  };

  systemd.services.mytask = {
    path = with pkgs; [
      bash # adds all executables from the bash package to PATH
      "/run/wrappers" # if you need something from /run/wrappers/bin, sudo, for example
    ];
    serviceConfig = {
      Description = "Run daily maintenance script.";
      Type = "oneshot";
      User = "test";
      ExecStart = "/srv/test/mytask.sh";
      # Set environment variables for the script.
      Environment = [
        "LD_LIBRARY_PATH=${pkgs.file}/lib"
        "VERBOSE=1"
      ];
    };
  };
}
```

### Plain Unit Configuration

We still support plain unit config in in {file}`/etc/local/systemd/<unit-name>.service`
but it's deprecated. Use Nix config instead, as shown above.

We bind your service unit to the {literal}`multi-user.target` by default so they
will be automatically started upon boot and stopped properly when the
machine shuts down.

:::{warning}
Don't use this for services that are meant to be started by a timer!
Oneshot services defined this way are triggered on by our management task
which means that they will run every 10 minutes!
:::

A simple unit file to start a service may look like this:

```{code-block} ini
:caption: myservice.service

[Unit]
Description=My Application Service

[Service]
Environment="PATH=/run/wrappers/bin:/nix/var/nix/profiles/default/bin:/nix/var/nix/profiles/default/sbin:/run/current-system/sw/bin:/run/current-system/sw/sbin"

User=s-myservice
Group=service

ExecStart=/srv/s-myservice/bin/runme
```

If you want to trigger a restart when a certain value changes which would
normally not be a part of the unit config, for example an externally
computed hash value, add the value using the `X-Restart-Triggers` directive.
The name of the directive is only a convention, you can use any directive to
trigger a restart. Using a templated unit, for example in a [batou](https://batou.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
deployment could look like this:

```{code-block} ini
:caption: myrestartservice.service

[Unit]
Description=My Restarting Application Service
X-Restart-Triggers={{ component.hash }}

...
```
